Additional options for command-line switch `/overrideconfig`. (#2524)
GitTools/GitVersion: docs/input/docs/usage/command-line.md

`/overrideconfig [key=value]` will override appropriate key from 'GitVersion.yml'.

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Author: This is well-known aproach used by MSBuild command line, to accept multiple key-value pairs with `;`. For example:

> msbuild /target:build /property:Configuration=Release;TargetFramework=net5.0

Multiple `/property` entries are possible in MSBuild as well. So since your current command-line syntax reassembles MSBuild syntax quite and a lot of developers will use it in the same build scripts, I thought it's good idea to follow already established syntax.

Regarding your concrete suggestion, space character cannot work as a separator for key-values, because key would be confused for next command line switch.

Adding multiple occurrences of `/overrideconfig` argument would be possible, there is an issue with current implementation as well.

My parsing of additional overrideconfig keys hooked into existing implementation, at the point where command line switches are already parsed. Namely inside of the method: `ParseOverrideConfig` of `ArgumentParser`. As far as I can tell, accepting multiple occurrences of `/overrideconfig` would require rewrite of complete command line parsing logic. Perhaps someone who is familiar with current implementation can give us 2nd opinion on this change?

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Reviewer: > This is well-known aproach used by MSBuild command line, to accept multiple key-value pairs with `;`

Yea, I think MSBuild is a horrendous example of command line interface and GitVersion should not be modelled by it. The more different from MSBuild we can make GtiVersion's CLI, the better. 😄 

> Multiple `/property` entries are possible in MSBuild as well.

Good. 👍🏼 

> Regarding your concrete suggestion, space character cannot work as a separator for key-values, because key would be confused for next command line switch.

Keys and values should be separated with `=`. But key-value-pairs should be separated by space.

> Perhaps someone who is familiar with current implementation can give us 2nd opinion on this change?

If it's too involved, let's postpone this to GitVersion 6 where we will redo the entire CLI (see #2275).

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Author: > Yea, I think MSBuild is a horrendous example of command line interface and GitVersion should not be modelled by it. The more different from MSBuild we can make GtiVersion's CLI, the better. 😄

Wherever I found command line switch that accept multiple values, they are splitted with `;` or `,` or some other funky character. For example `:` in `--resolve`:

`curl --resolve 'yada.com:443:127.0.0.1' https://yada.com/something`

> Keys and values should be separated with =. But key-value-pairs should be separated by space.

That's what I was referring too. Normally, arguments are split by space characters and we get array:

`switch value switch value switch value (etc)`

If we split key-value pairs with spaces, we suddenly get ambiguity, which argument is command line switch, which one is value of command line switch, which one is key value pair.

`switch value1 value2 switch value switch value`

It creates complexities for parser. Add on top of that that some switches might repeat and it becomes a mess. And I also think, maybe it's on the surface prettier, but it quickly becomes less human-readable to figure what is switch and what is key-value pair in a long command.

> If it's too involved, let's postpone this to GitVersion 6 where we will redo the entire CLI

Let me explain why I think it's this is a big change. Currently, repeated parameter `/output` will just be ignored:

`gitversion /output json /output buildserver`

In implementation where multiple occurrences are valid, you will have 2 cases now. One case where, like `/output` one value of parameter overrides another value. And second case where you want to merge key-value pairs from multiple occurrences. If key-value appear multiple times, then they should be overwritten/thrown away.

Regardless where this option is introduced, in GitVersion 5 or 6, it will introduce additional complexity that is currently not required.

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Reviewer: > `switch value switch value switch value (etc)`

No, I was thinking like this:

```shell
gitversion /overrideconfig key1=value1 key2=value2 key3=value3
```

Each key-value pair is separated with space, key and value is separated by `=`.

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Author: Yes, that we are talking about the same thing. This is 2nd example I made:

`switch value1 value2 switch value switch value`

Or translated to your example:
`gitversion /overrideconfig key1=value1 key2=value2 /ouput json /output buildserver`

The way how arguments are parsed universally, it's the array: `/overrideconfig`, `key1=value`, `key2=value`, `/output`, etc... Further, order is assumed/convention, option is followed by the value. Following that logic, `key2=value` ends up in a position of command line option and `/output` in the place of value.

What you are proposing introduces variable positions of options, values and child-values. And that introduces all kinds of combinatorial issues and need for top level parser to know all valid values of child-options to do parse this correctly You end up with mixing different concerns on the top level.

> Multiple options are separated by semicolon: `key1=value1;key2=value2`.

Reviewer: I see. It's not correct that the top-level parser needs to know what the underlying switches or values are, it just needs to know the difference between switches (arguments prefixed by `/`, `-` or `--`) and values (one or more arguments following a switch).

The way to implement this is to first split by space, then loop through each argument and stack switches with values before the values are passed to the switch handler. In the case of `/overrideconfig`, the values passed would be the array `["key1=value1", "key2=value2", "key3=value3]` and then it would be up to the switch handler to split the keys and values.

 understand that the current implementation is too naïve to take this into consideration. I still want to investigate alternatives to semicolon, though. Ideas?

To have **space characters** as a part of `value`, `value` has be enclosed with double quotes - `key="My value"`.

Double quote character inside of the double quoted `value` has to be be escaped with a backslash '\\' - `key="My \"escaped-quotes\""`.

> If closing double-qoute character is missing, it will be implicitily added at the very end of the command line argument - `key="My Value;key2=2(")`.

Reviewer: Let's just throw an exception when parsing fails instead. Autocorrection just leads to more errors and confusion, imho.

Author: For this behavior I also consulted MSBuild implementation. Specifically `[QuotingUtilities.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/e3eac4c45510dcb85a4a2aea323dae81189f60bb/src/Shared/QuotingUtilities.cs)` class:

```
        /*
         * Quoting Rules:
         * 
         * A string is considered quoted if it is enclosed in double-quotes. A double-quote can be escaped with a backslash, or it
         * is automatically escaped if it is the last character in an explicitly terminated quoted string. A backslash itself can
         * be escaped with another backslash IFF it precedes a double-quote, otherwise it is interpreted literally.
         * 
         * e.g.
         *      abc"cde"xyz         --> "cde" is quoted
         *      abc"xyz             --> "xyz" is quoted (the terminal double-quote is assumed)
         *      abc"xyz"            --> "xyz" is quoted (the terminal double-quote is explicit)
         * 
         *      abc\"cde"xyz        --> "xyz" is quoted (the terminal double-quote is assumed)
         *      abc\\"cde"xyz       --> "cde" is quoted
         *      abc\\\"cde"xyz      --> "xyz" is quoted (the terminal double-quote is assumed)
         * 
         *      abc"""xyz           --> """ is quoted
         *      abc""""xyz          --> """ and "xyz" are quoted (the terminal double-quote is assumed)
         *      abc"""""xyz         --> """ is quoted
         *      abc""""""xyz        --> """ and """ are quoted
         *      abc"cde""xyz        --> "cde"" is quoted
         *      abc"xyz""           --> "xyz"" is quoted (the terminal double-quote is explicit)
         * 
         *      abc""xyz            --> nothing is quoted
         *      abc""cde""xyz       --> nothing is quoted
         */
```

I assumed this is expected behavior when parsing command line quotes.

Reviewer: It may be expected when working with MSBuild, but GitVersion is not an MSBuild utility (although it has an MSBuild abstraction), but its own self-sustained tool. It's more important that GitVersion provides a good, clean interface familiar to developers used to a wide variety of CLI tools and not just Microsoft developers only familiar with MSBuild.

Author: I think MSBuild did try not invent new way of parsing, just modeled their implementation on most common scenario, but this is no problem. We can easily throw the exception.

Reviewer: Exception please 👍🏼

Author: While implementing throwing of exception, I discovered why MSBuild parsing of quotes was implemented with implicit termination at the end of string. It has same behavior as .NET Command Line applications. I suspect this to be convention and that other command-line apps have similar behavior (eg. C++ command line apps).

If I pass following, real-life parameters to the GitVersion.exe with double-quote missing at the very end:

`/overrideconfig assembly-versioning-format="{Major}.{Minor}.{Patch}.{env:BUILD_NUMBER ?? 0}`

`Main(string[] args)` method receives `args` where open double-quote is implicitly terminated and removed. More importantly, last parameter has spaces ` ?? 0`, but was not split, proving that the double-quote was indeed assumed at the very end of the line. Screenshot will make it more clear:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4405210/106053637-51bf3a80-60eb-11eb-9cea-1a066711ce60.png)

So, once I have implemented throwing of the exception, what happens is that unit-tests are throwing, but same parameters missing closing double-quotes in the command line just work normally. Therefore we just introduced inconsistency.

Additionally, now that I looked up the source code again after a few weeks - reason why I looked at MSBuild command-line parsing logic in the first place was that you have MSBuildTask implementation of `GitVersion`. This one can be called via `msbuild`, something like:

`msbuild /target:GitVersion /property:key=value;key=value`

So, my thinking was that more similarities in format would help users.

Reviewer: If it's difficult keeping the behavior consistent, then don't throw an exception. But I'm adamant we should not use `;` as a separator if we can avoid it.

Reviewer 2: > If it's difficult keeping the behavior consistent, then don't throw an exception. But I'm adamant we should not use `;` as a separator if we can avoid it.

In any case we need to have a solution that will be easy to migrate in v6. There we use the System.CommandLine

Author: Guys,

Requirements you put forward do not add up for me, from what I see looking at the current code.

> But I'm adamant we should not use ; as a separator if we can avoid it.

You can use other special character, instead of `;` for the sake of being different from MSBuild, but I ';' is probably the cleanest of all the special separator characters.

In order to use space character complete parsing logic of `ArgumentParser` would have to be rewritten.

Current `ArgumentParser` implementation has a lot of explicit branching decisions per switch value. Each switch value has it's own parsing logic and there is very little general-purpose parsing code. Check `ParseArguments` method. Further, there is even explicit check `EnsureArgumentValueCount` to ensure each switch accepts single argument, which is in contradiction with space character being used to separate child-options for a switch. We would screw up existing validation logic.

Regarding portability of this pull request to v6 command line parsing:

> In any case we need to have a solution that will be easy to migrate in v6. There we use the [System.CommandLine](https://github.com/dotnet/command-line-api)

All that would have to be done to make current `ParseOverrideConfig(Arguments arguments, string value)` method work in version 6 would be to make it accept array `string[] values` instead of value, and remove line inside of method that splits `value` based on `;` character.

> If it's too involved, let's postpone this to GitVersion 6 where we will redo the entire CLI (see #2275).

I'm afraid that postponing this change to GitVersion 6 would mean throwing current implementation away (code + unit-tests) and start everything from scratch.  This pull request started from idea to add single additional `/overrideconfig` option, extended to add 26 extra options, which based on my free time, I could do. For re-implementing all command line parsing in v5 or re-implementing pull request in v6, I cannot commit myself.

My proposal would be to integrate this as is. It will be breaking change to switch from `key1=value1;key2=value2` to space characters `key1=value1 key2=value2` in v6, but you will have breaking changes in any case, because complete parsing logic will be different.

Reviewer: Sorry for the late reply. I wonder, is it also impossible to repeat the `/overrideconfig` argument?

Author: I commented on the possibility of repeated options here:
https://github.com/GitTools/GitVersion/pull/2524#discussion_r565340553

The way parsing is implemented at the moment, second `/output` is not taken into consideration:

```
gitversion /output json /output buildserver
```

As far as I investigated the code, allowing multiple instances of the same option would also be global parser change.

Reviewer: `-output json -output buildserver` was implemented in #2128 and must be working as the following test (and many more) is successful?

https://github.com/GitTools/GitVersion/blob/1fd097957a0160ab0558867d36fe89917468b17b/src/GitVersion.App.Tests/ArgumentParserTests.cs#L173-L180

Author: @asbjornu This was very helpful example. After investigation implementation of this example, I managed to implement specifying multiple `overrideconfig` options using repeated `/overrideconfig` arguments, with only a few changes.

Following options are supported:
1. `assembly-file-versioning-format`
1. `assembly-file-versioning-scheme`
1. `assembly-informational-format`
1. `assembly-versioning-format`
1. `assembly-versioning-scheme`
1. `build-metadata-padding`
1. `commit-date-format`
1. `commit-message-incrementing`
1. `commits-since-version-source-padding`
1. `continuous-delivery-fallback-tag`
1. `increment`
1. `legacy-semver-padding`
1. `major-version-bump-message`
1. `minor-version-bump-message`
1. `mode`
1. `next-version`
1. `no-bump-message`
1. `patch-version-bump-message`
1. `tag-prefix`
1. `tag-pre-release-weight`
1. `update-build-number`

Read more about [Configuration](../configuration).

> It will not change config file 'GitVersion.yml'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `override-config` on the command line will not change the contents of the config file `GitVersion.yml`.
```
